Discussion and Conclusion

In this study, we compared the performance of the Cox proportional hazard model and the Lasso-based Cox regression models for patients diagnosed with head and neck cancer. We found that each model achieves better discriminative ability. 
The study involved 972 patients with Head and Neck Cancer treated at Malabar Cancer Centre, Thalassery. Of these, 40.43% died from cancer or other causes, while 59.57%were right censored. The mean age at diagnosis was 58.84 and the median follow-up time was 72 months. The dataset includes variables such as age, sex, tumour site, histology, tumour grade, composite stage, tumour size, nodal status, metastasis status, type of treatment given, and factors like smoking, alcohol consumption, and tobacco chewing.
In a study on head and neck cancer in India by Sonali Bagal et. Al (2023) the factors influencing the survival of head and neck cancer patients include sex and lifestyle factors like tobacco, smoking, and alcohol consumption [9]. In our study, the covariates sex, tobacco chewing, and alcohol consumption are not statistically significant in both the Cox PH model and the Lasso-based Cox regression model. In the study of epidemiology and survival analysis of head and neck cancer by Amit Badola et. Al (2023) was conducted on 574 patients from 2016 to 2020, resulting in a median follow-up of 21 months. The 18-month survival probability in that study is 58.5% and we got 57.5% in 72 months. Badola also found that age and gender are not significant, but tobacco is found to be significant since that study included 84.8% of the population with tobacco chewers [29]. In most studies, the Lasso-based Cox regression model is better than that of the Cox PH model. We found that each model has a better predictive accuracy. Therefore, either the Cox model or the lasso-based Cox model can be considered for risk prediction.
In this study, Kaplan Meier provides survival probability of 88.1, 70, 61.5, and 54.3 over 1, 3, 5, and 6 years respectively. Log Rank test suggests Age category, Primary Site, Grade, Tumour size, Nodal Status, Metastasis Status, Composite stage, Treatment given, Tobacco Chewing, Smoking Habit, and Alcohol Consumption as the statistically significant factors influencing survival of head and neck cancer patients. 
When we go through the proportional hazard assumption for the Cox model only the age category significantly violates the assumptions. Univariate Cox results show that covariates such as sex, histology, treatment given before registration at RI, tobacco chewing, and alcohol consumption did not significantly affect survival. The model selected for multivariate Cox PH using the stepwise backward elimination method includes primary site, tumour grade, tumour size, nodal status, treatment given, and smoking habit. Also, these variables show statistical significance in multivariate analysis.
The lasso-based Cox model suggests prognostic factors influencing the outcome of head and neck cancer patients by regularising the covariates in the dataset using a penalty. The optimal regularisation parameter obtained is 0.03024. The model after regularisation has prognostic factors such as age category, primary site, tumour grade, tumour size, nodal status, metastasis status, composite stage, type of treatment given, tobacco chewing, smoking habit, and alcohol consumption. Sex, histology, and treatment given before registration at RI do not significantly affect the survival of head and neck cancer patients.
When comparing these two models, the Cox PH and the lasso-based Cox model, we found that both the C-index and AUC values are similar for each model. Cox has a C-index of 0.676 whereas the lasso model has 0.673. When comparing AUC, Cox has an AUC of 0.72 whereas the Lasso Cox model has 0.717 which also indicates each model has a better predictive accuracy. 

Conclusion

The study aims to identify the prognostic factors influencing the survival of head and neck cancer patients treated at Malabar Cancer Centre from 2017 to 2019 using the Cox PH model and the Lasso-based Cox model along with the comparison of these two models. The median follow-up obtained is 72 months with a survival probability of 54.3% using the Kaplan-Meier method of survival analysis. Using the Cox PH model the factors influencing survival are primary site, tumour grade, tumour size, nodal status, type of treatment given, and smoking habit while the Lasso-based Cox model included age category, metastasis status, composite stage, tobacco chewing, and alcohol consumption. Each model showcases higher accuracy in prediction with a higher C-index and AUC. Despite previous studies suggesting that the Lasso-based Cox model performs better in prediction. This study indicates that both the Cox model and the Lasso-based Cox model can be used for survival prediction for this dataset.
